Time management
Introduction to time management.
After completing this lesson.
You will be able to explain what time management is.
You'll be able to discuss why good time management is important,
and you'll be able to identify common time management challenges.
Time management is the process of planning,
organizing,
and prioritizing how you use your time.
It involves making conscious choices about what you do
and when you do it,
staying focused on the task at hand
and getting important tasks done.
Time management is important because it reduces stress,
increases productivity,
improves focus and decision making,
and enhances work quality.
It can help you stay motivated and energetic at work,
making your professional life more successful and fulfilling.
It also helps prevent unnecessary delays that
can affect other members of your team.
The increased energy,
efficiency,
and satisfaction at work can also help create more
free time for other life tasks and meaningful activities.
This contributes to better work-life balance and overall quality of life.
In this way,
it's essential for creating lives that reflect our values and goals.
However,
effective time management is a skill that doesn't come naturally to everyone.
There are 4 common types of challenges that can
get in the way of good time management,
procrastination.
Distractions
Lack of planning and prioritization.
And mental barriers.
Procrastination
Procrastination is delaying important tasks until pressure forces us to act.
People tend to procrastinate when they are feeling overwhelmed,
uncertain about where to start,
or are afraid that they will fail at the task.
Sometimes people procrastinate by doing less urgent tasks before important ones,
but in the long run,
procrastination increases stress,
worsens work quality,
and creates a cycle of guilt that makes future time management harder.
Distractions
Frequent distractions train the brain to have shallow focus.
this makes it harder to engage in deep productive work.
The time spent to regain focus on a task can add up and reduce overall productivity.
Distractions come in many forms.
They can be digital like phone notifications,
messages,
or social media.
They can also be environmental,
such as background noise or clutter,
and they can be social,
like interruptions from co-workers or family members.
Distractions can be especially common in environments where
people have to constantly respond to others,
switch tasks,
or react to crises.
Lack of planning and prioritization.
Planning and prioritization are important aspects of time management.
Without them,
too much time can get easily lost or spent on the wrong things.
Instead of making steady progress toward goals,
you might find yourself constantly scrambling to get things done at the last minute
or reacting to urgent crises.
A lack of planning and prioritization can appear in many ways,
such as
or time estimation,
unrealistic scheduling and over committing,
starting tasks without knowing what comes next,
multitasking without finishing anything,
and focusing on what's urgent instead of what's important.
And mental barriers.
Mental barriers that can present a challenge to time management include
anxiety,
which can lead to avoidance and interrupt getting through tasks,
burnout,
which drains the energy needed to plan and focus,
perfectionism,
which can make tasks take longer than anticipated,
or prevent someone from starting in the first place,
and chronic stress,
which reduces the cognitive flexibility needed to organize or complete tasks.
Additionally,
people who have ADHD are on the autism spectrum,
or have other neurological differences,
can struggle with things like initiating or switching between tasks,
maintaining focus and time awareness.